My name is Brian Hagerty. I'm the chair
of the El Paso Community College Board
of Trustees. I want I want to welcome
everybody to our special meeting uh
today.
uh the board board of trustees of the
community college will uh meet and you
can follow along on YouTube at https
www.youtube.com/usergoepcc
want to welcome everyone here uh Belle
can you take the role please
>> yes sir Mrs Robiss
>> here
>> Mr. Mr. Uxer
>> here.
>> Miss Naha is running a little late. Mrs.
Moy
>> here.
>> Mr. Mendes
>> Mr. Hagerty
>> here.
>> Dr. Graham will not be in attendance.
>> We have anything for open forum?
>> We do not. Judge.
>> Okay. Can you read uh we're going to
jump down to 5.4.
>> Read that please. Bill.
>> Item 5.4. discussion and take possible
action on proposed policy for adoption
on first reading to recognize the EPCC
faculty senate and ensure compliance
with the requirements of Texas Senate
Bill 37. It should read 89th legislative
regular session including statutory
sections governing the establishment and
function of faculty councils or senates.
Texas Education Code 51.3522,
51.3523,
51.3541,
51.913,
and 51.9431
pursuant to section 554.071
of the Texas Government Code.
>> Have a motion.
>> Move to approve.
>> Second.
>> I have a question.
>> Okay, that's after I say discussion.
>> Okay.
discuss.
>> Well, I want to ask the attorney first.
Do we need to go to an executive
session?
>> We do not judge unless somebody has a
legal question about this.
>> Okay. Well, this is Mr. Aer. You may
have a legal question, but is it not a
legal question yet?
>> I don't hope not.
>> Okay. Me, too.
>> One more time. Can we go through and
have you read these things items as
printed A, B, C or numbers, but the list
of proposals as printed in the agenda
and not read every one of the letters
and numbers, please.
>> Legal council provide us guidance on
that. I I don't have an issue.
>> I hope so because the legal council told
me in the board meeting last time when I
asked to do that,
it said no problem. Yeah, there there's
no issue with doing that.
>> Okay,
>> go ahead, doc.
>> On 37, so um obviously the um Senate
passed Senate Bill 37 um which
essentially
abolishes the faculty senate as it is
known um today as of September 1st. Um
we have been working closely with our
faculty senate, Dr. and I Dr. Penley has
has been instrumental in helping us with
this as well as well as legal counsel.
Um this institution has long recognize
shared governance. We believe in shared
governance. Um so we have to move
forward with the resolution in order to
be in compliance with the state. Um and
we are also moving forward with all of
the areas that we have to uh implement
by the 1 of September. Um this includes
uh the board. Um I will have to appoint
members of faculty senate including all
the officers. Um not something that I
was eager to do but it's what the law is
and so I will comply with the law and we
will ensure that we're in full
compliance. Again legal counsel has
provided excellence guidance for us as
we continue to move forward. I ask Miss
as well as as well as her colleague to
provide any insight that they have
regards to the resolution.
I have a question out of this in the re
the reappoint is the structure the
organizational structure the line the
chart organizational chart for the
Senate will it remain the same? Are you
designating new positions, reigning
responsibilities, whatever your
responsibility with the or you going to
say the sin is now organized and
composed as previously? We would have
loved to have done it that way. We're
not allowed to do it that way. So, um,
Miss Maren, myself, other members of the
institution,
um, went to, uh, Austin this past
Friday, um, to hear from TASBY, um, Tech
Association of School Boards who
provides, um, our legal policies, um,
and get insight from them. They made it
very clear, um, that the reading is that
I am responsible of appointing
approximately a third of the faculty
senate. It can be comprised of up to 60
members of which um each of the
respective um divisions will appoint a
member or elect a member rather and then
I appoint um so the constitution of the
composition of faculty senate will will
change the officers I am responsible for
appointing they can serve up to six
one-year terms and then they have to sit
out for a two-year period. those
senators that are elected can be elected
for one two-year term and then they have
to sit out for two years after that
term. Um, and we obviously are working
with faculty senate so that they can
have their elections and have one
they're looking at one-year terms and
two-year terms so they're not all
rolling over at the same time. Um, as
far as the organization of the faculty
senate, that will it can be no more than
60 members. We anticipate that ours will
be approximately 42 members if I'm not
mistaken.
Um, and again, we're moving forward in
that direction.
>> Is that a significant change from what
we had?
>> I mean, what what exists today is the
old
>> um what exists today is the faculty
center as was elected.
>> September one.
>> Yeah. as September 2nd. Is there a
significant change in the organization
>> the the leadership of the Senate?
>> Okay.
>> There is not.
>> Any other questions?
>> M do you have any anything to add?
>> Um just that we we need to adopt this.
the the law requires that the college if
it's going to recognize a faculty senate
that it be done by September 1st.
There is uh TASBY is working on a a
permanent policy with regard to that
that you'll have and receive at some
point in the probably late fall early
winter. The policy that we've attached
is an interim policy. It follows this
the very closely the language of the
statute and the requirements of what the
college has to do with regard to the
faculty senate. Uh but it is a temporary
policy for all intents and purposes
because the pol the college uses TASBY
for all of its policies. It's just not
ready. So we've drafted together with
administration the board policy 2.01.02
2 actually administration drafted it and
we reviewed this policy and and that's
what we're proposing. It's important
that you have also a resolution
that I've given you today uh and that
that become part of the board's record
along with the policy so that it's clear
in the pol in the minutes of the board
that this resolution has been adopted
and that the board has recognized the
continuation of the faculty senate.
>> Do we need to read the resolution?
I think it's best judge to have a clear
record in the minutes.
>> Okay. Got a bill.
>> Do we need to vote or you have a first
and a second?
>> You'll read it first and then and then
the board will vote to adopt or not
adopt.
>> Resolution authorizing the continuation
and ratification of the faculty senate.
Whereas during the 89th Texas
legislative session in 2025, the Texas
legislature passed Senate Bill 37, which
was subsequently signed into law by
Governor Greg Abbott on June 20, 2025.
Whereas Senate Bill 37 relates to the
governance of public institutions of
higher education, including review of
curriculum and certain degree and certif
certificate programs, a faculty council
or senate training for members of the
governing board and the establishment
powers and duties of the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board Office of
the Budsman. Whereas Senate Bill 37 in
section 51.3522
of the Texas Education Code authorizes
the governing board of an institution of
higher education to establish a faculty
senate and sets forth the policy by
which the governing board shall exist
and select its members. Whereas the
board of trustees of El Paso County
Community College District, EPCC, hereby
recognizes the importance of the role of
its faculty senate and declares that it
shall continue to operate at EPCC in
accordance with section 51.3522
of the Texas Government Code. Whereas
the board of education, I'm sorry, Texas
Education Code, sorry. Whereas the board
of trustees of El Paso County Community
College District determines that interim
board policy 2.01 01.02 is in accordance
with section 51.3522
of the Texas Education Code. Therefore,
be it resolved, the board of trustees of
El Paso County Community College
District, officially ratifies the
continuation of its faculty senate
adopts interim policy 2.01.02
02 governing the existence and
membership of its faculty senate to be
in effect until such time as the board
of trustees subsequently adopts a policy
to be prepared to be prepared by the
Texas Association of School Boards in
accordance with section 51.3522
of the Texas Education Code and declares
that its faculty senate as designated in
in policy 2.01.02 02 meets the policies
adopted by the board and the
requirements of section 51.3522
of the Texas Education Code. Be it
further resolved that this resolution
along with intram policy 2.01.02
be included included in the permanent
minutes of this board adopted this 6th
day of August 2025 by the board of
trustees of El Paso County Community
College District.
>> Anybody have any other questions?
If I understand this 33
51 3522
acknowledges that that it's
discretionary at each institution
whether it will have effect
or not but if they do they they set out
organizational structure which you
identify is that correct because there's
some I guess there's some institutions
some colleges or that don't have a is
that correct
>> that's correctum it spells out very
clearly that the faculty senate is
purely an advisory board that they have
no authority in any of the actions of
the institution. It's very specific. Um
but again
from my perspective and from the
administration's perspective we believe
in shared governance and we believe that
it's important for the institution to
continue but it's discretionary whether
we have one or not. That's correct.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. By by voting on this 5.4 before
this includes is already in the record
so that we can take a vote.
>> Any other questions?
>> Call call the question.
>> Mr. Urer.
>> Hi.
>> Mrs. Robless.
>> Mrs. Moy.
>> Hi.
>> Mr. Menddees.
>> Mr. Hagerty.
>> Hi.
>> Okay.
>> So, did you need a signature by you and
Dr. Graham so that and so that that is
included with the signatures in the
minutes? I know Dr. Graham's not here,
but I advised um
that we we can get her permission and
then insert her signature.
>> Sorry.
>> Auto.
>> Well, we're going back to item 5.1.
>> Yes, ma'am.
>> Item 5.1, Dr. Julie Penley, vice
president of research, accreditation,
and planning, will make a presentation
on the update of the college district's
strategic plan.
Hello Moto.
Um, this presentation is a quick
overview of where uh we have been and
and where you have as a board uh where
we are as of today and where we are
moving forward with our next strategic
plan. Before I get started, a huge shout
out to Rachel Baes in Dr. Smith's office
for drafting the visuals. There is no
way I could have done this myself. So,
um so this is the crux of the
presentation. Um and and if you're
crunched for time, we can stop here and
and we can move on. But uh you might
remember last summer um I came to you
during your uh summer retreat and I
presented at that time the current
mission and vision statement and uh I
asked you to put your thinking caps on
and make some decisions whether those
statements were still uh accurate in in
the next five years or whether you might
want to revise them. Um after that uh
cabinet uh began
talking about um the the structure of
our work in the near future uh taking a
page out of Dr. Saja's book uh with the
four pillars of student success that
that we talked about at the retreat uh
with entry progress completion and
career. So while you were doing your
homework with the mission and vision, we
were doing our homework uh beginning to
craft some general statements um and
general goals and outcomes that
hopefully would align with that mission
and vision. So we were we were working
together during uh during that part of
2024. Um earlier this year uh the board
came together and uh finalized and
ultimately approved the new mission and
mission statement and uh at that time
cabinet um once we had the green light
I didn't know if I needed to use my
teacher voice. Um once we had the green
light in terms of mission and vision,
then we were able to begin finalizing uh
the goals and outcomes that together
with your statements created the
skeleton of our strategic plan.
That plan is uh in its very final stages
uh with Dr. Mo and uh director Christy
Frescus on the uh visuals that will be
presented and provided to the college
employees and and to you as well as to
our external stakeholders. Uh the plan
itself goes into effect and is
officially launched on September 1st.
At that time, uh, budget heads at the
college will be creating their new, uh,
annual area plan for 2526
in alignment and in support of the
strategic plan. We we talked about that
at our uh, cabinet retreat earlier last
month.
And then we repeat the process in a few
years. So, you will hopefully not have
to hear from me about strategic plan
until uh, summer of 2029.
So, uh, Mr. Exer,
>> will there be annual updates? I mean, I
see put out in 25 and then nobody's
going to talk about it in 26, 27, 28.
We'll wait until 29 and do it all over
again.
>> No, we'll absolutely uh be providing
updates in cabinet. It'll be an ongoing
discussion. Uh, and you say the word and
uh myself or someone from my division
will be happy to provide updates.
>> Thank you. annually seminar.
>> No, absolutely. Mr. Plus, many of the
data presentations that we bring to the
board are part of the strategic plan.
We'll just make sure to reference that
as per our strategic plan so that each
of the respective board members is up to
speed on where we are and then we'll
have Dr. Pedley provide an update
annually.
>> So, uh going back to brass tax, uh the
vision statement that you all uh
approved in February of this year is on
the screen. Again, this is the uh
aspirational
um what you are directing the college to
to achieve. Um not not that different uh
in spirit from the previous vision
statement. We continue to focus on on a
student success um and our role as an
educational institution um towards that
success through our learning
opportunities whether they're uh
structured um academic programs, whether
they are uh out of the classroom
learning uh to to help students achieve
their personal goals.
With the general um what comes the
general how how you all will be
achieving that aspirational statement.
Um it it's a lot of words. Uh it it will
fit nicely in a booklet and on a poster
I promise. Uh Dr. Mo is
>> been doing uh some terrific work uh with
the visuals uh with with her marketing
team. Um but the crux of this statement
is um again providing not only the
educational opportunities but the
supports, the experiences, that holistic
college experience
um to help not only the individual
student but their families, the
community uh and the the region that we
are so proud to serve.
And this uh is not a statement that you
all um have approved. your your uh focus
is on the mission and vision as it
should be. Uh but we took that um vision
if you will that that philosophy of EPCC
a step further by generating a student
success statement. Uh we used to have an
equity statement for reasons that we
will not discuss. We are not uh touting
it as an equity statement. The spirit of
this is is very similar though. We we
see students as individuals uh and and
the heart of this statement is in the
last sentence. Uh we are committed to
success for every student and um for
creating opportunities for that student
and providing resources and support for
that student. Um so again your role as a
board is to uh give us direction through
the mission and vision. You did that
beautifully. We uh added the student
success statement to double down on our
commitment to uh supporting every
student, meeting them where they are.
And now we're ready to go back to the
goals and outcomes. Again, this is
something that cabinet worked on. There
was a lot of back and forth, a lot of
intentional conversations
um how we would support those four
pillars that Dr. Sata has mentioned um
in multiple presentations and how we can
get a little bit more specific in what
it means to meet a goal of progress or a
goal of completion. So this is what we
will be rolling out with our strategic
plan. Um what you may notice um
particularly for returning trustees is
we now have some quantifiable metrics
associated with these outcomes uh to
better provide budget heads uh and
everyone at the college with some um
clear tracking if you will uh of of how
we are doing towards achieving these
goals. Many of these goals uh align with
what the support what the state has
identified as valuable in terms of
funding formulas. Um it also aligns with
some of our existing work with our
quality enhancement plan. So although
the words maybe some of the metrics may
appear new to employees or or perhaps to
you, they're really a continuation and
an explication of the work we've been
doing for for years.
Um, some of you have probably noticed
there's an asterisk at the very bottom.
Uh, that one does not have a metric
associated with it. I will come back to
that because you'll see that um outcome
on each of our goals. So, um, any
questions
uh or comments about the outcomes
specific to entry?
Okay. Uh, moving on to progress. uh as
students not only have come to the
college and and identified their area of
concentration, how we can get them to
successfully complete that first half of
their program. Uh so we identified some
some key metrics that we have found to
be important in that student success
during those critical uh first
semesters. A lot of this is supported by
national research. Um uh you may have
heard Dr. set out to talk about uh
gateway courses in English and math tend
to be bottlenecks for students. So we we
brought that to the forefront of some of
our focus.
Um dual credit is also a growing uh
population and is something that is uh
you heard from Dean Bado uh last week
about the growth in dual credit. So we
we want to uh bring that to the
forefront as well. And again you'll see
that uh catchall final outcome of
supporting other departments.
So once we uh have students and
supported students successfully through
their first half of the program, our
work is obviously not done. And so our
completion goal focuses on getting
students to complete their reward. Um
and so these types of outcomes focus on
that second half of a student's program.
Uh obviously the total awards
um not just an award for an award's sake
but an award in a meaningful high demand
uh high wage program in our area. Uh we
we obviously don't want students to um
rack up a lot of of credits or a lot of
hours that are not going to meet their
needs. And so we we brought that in as a
fourth outcome.
And then that last outcome uh which is
beginning to look familiar to you I'm
sure supporting other departments in
their goal efforts.
And then our last goal um is um that
continuation in their educational
journey or for students that are focused
more on direct work uh credentials
supporting them in that arena as well.
So this is sort of a split goal for us.
Um continuing to work with our regional
uh partners through our advisory
committees and other outlets to make
sure that we are meeting the community's
demand for highquality program uh
training. Um lensure rates for many of
our programs is an important part of
getting students into the workforce. Um
transfer
um and again dual credit hours
So far so good.
>> All right. So that fifth goal um it is
uh designed to help um divisions such as
mine um perhaps uh such as uh
information technology, finance and
administrative operations. We don't have
many opportunities to directly interact
interact with students. um our role is
more of a support um function. And so in
order for us to see ourselves in our
strategic plan and to make um important
and meaningful area plans, we added this
uh this outcome as a way to provide that
support whether it's uh by partnering
with the education workforce division or
partnering with student and enrollment
services or partnering with one another
um to create ways to fulfill the
strategic plan goals and outcomes. Um
for example um my uh the institutional
research department which is in my
division the director uh came to me
yesterday and said what do you think
about creating some better dashboards to
track each one of these outcomes. And I
said that would be terrific and maybe
you could work with it to help um that
department. we can come together and
create a really powerful um dashboard uh
whether it's in enhancing our current
structure or creating something new so
that everybody can easily track this
work and not get um lost in the
wilderness if you will.
So that's why that's why that outcome is
there and that is all I had. I am happy
to answer any questions. We we are so
excited about this strategic plan or or
I am so excited about this strategic
plan. Um and I hope that that comes
through.
>> I I have a question.
>> Yes, sir.
>> How did we do uh up to 2024 on our past
strategic plan?
>> Did we meet every goal 100%.
>> Um
I do not have that number with me. I
would say um likely not because we did
not have specific numbers for the for
the current strategic plan that still is
in place until August 31st. We are
gathering some baseline data right now
which will serve not only to guide us on
this incoming strategic plan but it will
tell us where we are on the current
plan.
>> So uh maybe in one of the upcoming board
meetings you can bring us up to date and
let us know how we did on the past or
>> Sure. Sure. Absolutely. Happy to do that
>> so that we don't skip something we
missed in our next five years.
>> Absolutely.
>> No, I think that's um a great
suggestion, judge. Um we had some in our
strategic plan which at the time that we
voted made sense for the institution. It
was prior to certain laws passing. Um
and so some of them it's not in our best
interest to um to report on. I'll give
an example. So our goals and outcomes,
goal two is drive student success. But
is absolutely correct. We have specific
metrics. Um but we can provide data on
those. But for instance, one of the
goals under driving student success was
close equity gaps in student outcomes.
Uh that in today's uh body politic is
not something that we would be reporting
on which is based on Senate Bill 17 that
passed in 2023. Um but there's others
that we can, you know, facilitating
college transitions, preparing students
with marketable skills for gainful
employment. Um but we can we can bring
um a report to the board and and show
you as as we launch this one, this one
will launch uh the 1 of September and we
can bring we can make sure that we have
time in the fall to report to the board
where we were on meeting those. At the
same time, I remind the board that that
strategic plan was during the um
pandmic.
>> I give Dr. Pley a whole lot of credit
for getting that strategic plan up and
running and through during the pandemic
>> but I'm I'm sure there are goals that we
didn't meet with enrollment goals etc
that the pandmic affected
>> and remind me again how do how do we
monitor the progress we're making?
>> So the the um excellent question Mrs.
Moy and the the strategic plan is so
exciting because it is going to be how
the budget heads are going to create
their area plan. So uh myself, my
colleagues in the room, any budget head
at the college will be generating a new
area plan for the academic year. They
will pick one of these metrics to focus
on. We will have the baselines um for uh
at the aggregate level. they can uh try
to
say for example uh number one on the
screen I'm going to focus on a an area
plan targeting career exploration in and
out of the classroom by 5%. So we'll
have that baseline number. They may uh
they're going to outline how they're
going to do it. They have quarterly
updates that they provide. And so by the
end of the year, by um next September,
October of 26, they'll have their
baseline data. They'll have where they
ended up. They'll have the interim steps
along the way. They can say, you know, I
I did it. Yay me. Or they can say, I
didn't quite hit that mark. I want to
extend the plan and double up my
efforts. So it's more at the individual
level but it is uh accountability
through our um actually through the
software that you all were were so kind
to approve uh at last week's board
meeting that that software was to
document the planning efforts at the
college
>> at any point they can re-trigger
evaluation.
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. They don't have
to generate a new plan every year. They
are welcome to or they can extend the
plan. Sometimes work takes a little bit
more than a year to to achieve. So When
we're doing any type of expenses, do we
point back to how is this expense going
to tie to this specific action?
>> Yes. Well, we we tie um the planning
into the budget development process. So
uh our director of institutional
planning uh comes to the budget workshop
presentations in February to to align
that because it it is resource
allocation and it it um justifies to our
stakeholders not only how we're using
those resources but if we might need
additional resources
for a specific purpose not just I I need
more money for XYZ but you know tying
everything we do back to that strategic
plan in support of the mission and
vision.
Thank you.
>> Mhm.
>> Good work.
>> Okay. Thank you so much.
>> All right.
>> Item 5.2. Mr. Fernando Flores, vice
president of finance and administration,
CFO, will provide an update on the
development of the 2025 2026 fiscal year
budget.
Let the record show that Miss Nara has
joined the meeting.
Waiting on you.
>> Thank you, Chair Hagerty.
Good afternoon, Chair Hagerty. Um,
members of the board, Dr. Sata, thank
you for the opportunity to present the
second budget development workshop of
the year. The first being on June the
25th was the initial board budget
workshop. And so my name is Fernando
Flores. I'm the vice president of
finance and administration. I'm
supported by Miss Anna Zuniga, associate
vice president, budget and finance, as
well as Miss Laura Deis, the budget
director.
At the June 25th budget workshop, I had
said that the main goal is developing a
sustainable budget. Well, that has not
changed. It is still the main goal to
produce a sustainable budget. The other
thing that we talked about were that on
June 25th,
many of the numbers that were presented
were preliminary.
So, we're a little bit over a month
later and the numbers have firmed up
quite a bit. We have better numbers,
better estimates for expenditures.
And so today we're going to look at the
numbers of the as they've rolled forward
and uh go over that in a little bit more
detail.
So our agenda today is is um just to say
that one budget workshop is under our
belt. It's provided on June the 25th.
And so now we have updated the baseline
budget as of June 30th. At the June 25th
presentation, it was updated through May
the 31st. It is advanced by one month
and we've updated the revenues for
fiscal year 2425
which become the basis for the 2526
budget. So it's very important to update
the current revenues to predict what the
revenues might be for next year. In
addition, uh Dr. Sat has vetted the
additional request with the vice
presidents that are uh in attendance
today
and so you're going to see revised
funding strategies based upon revenue
projections and this will help in your
decision- making later as you consider a
salary increase.
So then we will at the end of the
presentation talk about next steps
towards developing a fiscal year 2526
operating budget.
So how does the current year budget
revenues
how do the current budget year revenues
look?
So for state appropriations we see we
have a positive variance of $4
million.
That is about 175
that that is about close to the number
we predicted at the June 25th budget
workshop up 11.11%.
Uh overhead recovery is slightly down uh
84,000 a minimal amount. And so when we
look at local funds, tuition and fees
are up by $951,000.
At the June 25th presentation, they were
up about $3.5 million. They were
predicted much higher. We have since
looked at our revenue projections and
gotten a better view of what the summer
exemptions are, which exemptions are a
contra revenue account. So we adjusted
the tuition and fees we expect for this
year down. Uh so that is a significant
difference from what we reported June
the 25th. This is a more accurate
prediction of where the revenues will
be. And so uh property taxes are coming
in at 75 million756,733.
That's a positive variance of $2.7
million approximately. Uh 3.6 65%
higher.
Other other income is still trending
higher. That the large component of that
is interest income. So uh that is $4.8
million higher. It there's such a large
variance because interest income is uh
something that is hard to predict and uh
very variable. So we budget
conservatively for interest income. But
interest rates have remained fairly
high. The Fed has not changed rates yet.
But the world is very dynamic and that
can happen very quickly. So we do not
rely on interest income as a stable
revenue source. But at the moment it's
yielding a nice variance 4.8 million
uh dollars positive. So we come down to
the self-supporting line item. It shows
self-supporting shows a budget of $3
million and we have revenues predicted
of 1.6 million. That shows a decrease on
here but really because we're showing
actual revenues to budget um it shows a
decrease but the self-supporting
accounts we do not spend more than the
revenue that comes into them. That's a
very important aspect to keep in mind.
We are not going to go into any kind of
deficit when it comes to
self-supporting. We only spend and
monitor those accounts very closely in
uh in that area. So overall the way that
revenues look they we have a uh increase
of 11.9 million almost $12 million over
budgeted revenues. Yes sir.
>> Just because I'm old and I forget
things. Can you just couple examples of
what self-supporting really is? I mean
what are those?
>> Sure. Sure. So uh many times the
workforce area is very dynamic. It wants
to respond to industry demand.
>> Okay.
>> So they want to pilot a program to see
if it's viable and if it's viable uh the
rules call for them mainstreaming that
account into the operating budget.
>> Okay. I understand. I'm just
misconception when you say supporting
program.
Yes sir. Are there any other questions
about this slide?
So the takeaway from here is when we
look at um budgeted revenue is $166.5
million compared to what actually we
predict is going to come in, there's a
positive variance of almost $12 million.
719%
increase.
So looking at the current year as well
how that's going to uh wind up. This is
our prediction for how operations are
going to finish this year. This
particular slide incorporates revenues
and our projected re expenditures. So we
see that we have brought forward we have
brought forward the projected revenues
of $178.5
million which is a positive variance of
almost $12 million. We saw that on the
previous slide.
So now what we do over here we estimate
expenditures and we estimate our
expenditures to come in at $148.6
million
resulting in a positive variance of
$29.8 8 million for the year. That's our
prediction. Uh the surplus that is
resulting from this uh helps to bolster
fund balance which is looked on very
positively by SAC COC rating agencies
and also allows us to continue the
practice of supporting deferred
maintenance projects in the plant funds.
So we have a lot of uh need in the area
of maintaining buildings and grounds so
forth. So the college uh is very
fortunate this year and and last year as
well to contribute to addressing
deferred maintenance needs. Um so this
is the result of what we expect for for
year end this year.
So looking forward towards next year's
budget development. This is a strategic
plan for that. So, as a review, planning
for revenues, the appropriation that
we're going to talk about is a result of
the 89th legislative session, which I
think is been extended, Dr. Sata.
And so, uh, a result also of the 88th
legislature where the House Bill
historic House Bill 8, uh, was greatly
impacted. And so our revenues for the
appropriation have changed greatly. They
are based upon performance measures and
the payment methods that uh they have
implemented are different from the past.
In the past we'd be funded on a bienium
basis. We get an appropriation we
usually be good for two years. So now
that static model has changed to a more
dynamic one. It's based upon about 17
different performance measures and so uh
very different and also the payment
system that they've implemented is
different as well.
So that is the model that we're
currently operating under. Tuition and
fees
the tuition and fees um line item here.
We've we've uh reviewed our tuition and
fees estimate and as I mentioned uh the
tuition and fees from the current year
largely go to predict what we're going
to receive next year and we budget that
way. It's a very conservative way of
budgeting what you're receiving now and
then you budget that way expect that in
the future. So that is typically what we
do but um what we also do we keep an eye
on enrollment
and as a result we've been looking
almost every day at our enrollment
numbers for the fall and that is
trending lower. Our fall enrollment is
showing some decreases and so we have to
consider the risk of that into our
budgeting. So, we have lowered our
expectation for tuition and fees by $1.1
million as a result of what we're seeing
for enrollment for this fall.
Now, that does not mean that that's the
ultimate number we're going to use
because, as you know, the budget is
presented on August the 27th
to the board for approval. So between
now and August 27th our enrollment may
get better to the extent where we adjust
our revenue estimates.
What is our past uh information show
that it does increase between those
those weeks? The the past information
shows that we had a slight increase at
this point in time and at this point in
time we have a very small decrease
predicted but at this point in time last
year we we show that we were we had a
positive
uh increase in enrollment.
So right now it is not positive.
>> It is showing a negative number. So, we
consider that as we develop our tuition
and fees prediction and we'll continue
to do that all the way up until we
finalize and present a final budget for
you. So, it may go up or if it needs to
go down a little bit, it'll be it'll be
decreased as well. The nice thing about
um what the college has done
historically to budget for this to
mitigate that risk of enrollment
declining the college maintains a
bianium reserve.
That bianium reserve is meant for just
such a situation.
>> We're currently flat judge. We're at
18810 right now. We were at 18857 last
year. We've seen the enrollment process
tighten as we've gotten closer to fall
semester
in
contradiction with what we saw in the
spring. We saw a very healthy spring, 5%
increase in the spring. Uh the summer
was very healthy as well. Um significant
increase this summer. Um all of those
are indications that we expect to see a
strong fall. Um but it is um weakening
as we get closer. So I asked Vice
President Flores to adjust the budget
accordingly. I didn't want there to be
any surprises and so it's we're much
more conservative with the budgeting
process. So I ask that he um adjust the
budget in particular
accordingly. Um I if anyone has specific
questions I ask Dr. Maya for
Dr.
Just real quick, you mentioned something
about the the current session. Is there
any realistic or expectation or the
current special sessions for budget or
is that really set the special sessions
going to deal with other things? So the
special session, it's a great question,
Mr. Lots of different items on special
session which essentially we know that
our many of our legislators not in
Austin and so we'll see what ends up
happening. I would imagine the governor
will call a second special session and
potentially more until um the maps come
to completion. There is an item on the
special agenda that pertains to us
specifically and it is tax rate. Um now
that won't affect this current year's
budget, but that could affect the
college budget going forward.
>> Um I don't know if you have any judge or
any other member has any other questions
on enrollment. Um again, we're
continuing to run enrollment and we will
run enrollment through um the first week
of class. Um we allow some uh scheduled
adjustments and then obviously dual
credit early college high school will
continue to work with our district
partners um all the way up until census
date. And actually I'd remind the board
that we have um many meers throughout.
So even on census date when we report an
enrollment that's not the final
enrollment because we have
that go out throughout the fall term.
>> Sure. Uh so point in time as Dr.
mentioned we're basically flat. We're 47
students down from last semester at the
same date. Uh classes start August 25th.
We have several campaigns going on right
now where we are reaching out to
students who have uh enrolled uh but
haven't completed their FAFSA or need to
complete their FAFSA. So, we have
internal campaigns going on.
Trellis is one of our partners as well.
They're assisting us with those students
seeking assistance with financial aid.
So, we continue to add students also as
Dr. Sata mentioned through dual credit
early college high school enrollment
because we still receive those rosters
from our ISD partners. So we are working
to get our enrollment keep our
enrollment up and also uh wherever we
end up today the really important number
is where we end up at census date which
is September 10. So we work really hard
to get our students
enrolled
and sorry yeah uh we work hard to get
our students enrolled and paid uh by the
by census date. So, we try to reduce the
number of students that we end up having
to drop for a non-payment.
Uh so lots of campaigns going on and
uh we still have extended hours uh
coming up this Saturday uh August 16th
10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. August 23rd
10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. as well as
extended hours the week before classes
start and the first two days of
enrollment. As Dr. about that mentioned.
We still allow students to enroll as
long as a class hasn't met or via a
petition through a dean.
>> Have we done any analysis on how many
students are not returning or how many
we expected to return but are not?
>> Um I can look at we do see what our uh
continuing student enrollment looks
like. So we all summer long we're
looking very healthy. It's been the past
couple of weeks that we've seen this
slowdown. And one of the markers that we
do look at is our continuing students.
So that's where we've seen a little bit
of decline. So uh there are there are
captive audience. So we're reaching out
to those students as well. If they
enrolled
haven't graduated, enrolled in spring or
summer and not enrolled in fall, we're
reaching out to those students as well.
Okay, thank you.
>> So, we're going to continue looking at
tuition and fees and adjust accordingly
up until we present you a final budget
on August the 27th.
The next item are property taxes. This
is a number that has been finalized in
the budget on July the 25th. We received
the certified valuations
uh from the CAD and our valuations went
up about $4.6 billion
to 73.46
billion.
Uh and also we had new property valued
at $1.5 billion
and resulting in a no new revenue rate
of 10.3563
cents per $100 valuation. that is down
from 10.77
almost half a penny down. So that is
driving our ability uh to raise tax
revenue should the college ever need
that. Uh as a reminder, we are capped at
15 cents per $100 valuation. So anything
driving our rate lower is uh good for
the future should it be needed.
Now, planning for additional funding
request. Um, today one of the items on
the agenda is consideration of a salary
increase. So, the presentation before
that on the budget uh is to inform what
the capacity is for the district to fund
a salary increase and also additional
funding requests that have been
presented by the executive levels that
you're going to see in just a little
bit. At this point in time, uh what has
changed from June the 25th is that Dr.
Zata has had a chance to vet the
additional request and uh dropped them
by close to half a million dollars. So
it is a significant decrease
and so um there is going to be continued
impact from the Gazsby 68 and 75 on
unrestricted net position. That is a
very variable amount. We depend on the
information from the state which we do
not have yet but still it's something
that needs to be considered. It averages
about $4 million impact to our fund
balance every year. And so an additional
Gazsby that u Anna and her team are
working on in accounting is Gazsby 101
compensated absences. These are things
that we are mandated to follow by the
governmental accounting standards board.
Otherwise we would get an unmodifi we
would not get an unmodified opinion and
the uh financial statements that the
college produces are super important to
receive the appropriation to get pel and
are viewed by many granting agencies. So
a very important document to the
district.
So looking at our uh performance tier
this is our appropriation. This is not
changed from the June 25th presentation.
Um, uh, looking at the terminology near
final. This is a terminology from the
coordinating board. So that implies that
there might be some changes to that. So,
but that's the best number that we have
for our appropriation. I will tell you
that that 43.9 million is a projection
by the coordinating board on what we're
going to earn as appropriation. Once we
report our actual enrollment numbers to
the coordinating board, it will be
different from that, but we don't know
by how much.
So, uh that number will change either a
little bit or a lot. We don't know at
this point. It's the best number that we
have so far.
And so that's the CR some of the
criteria that now go into the
appropriation
uh that is very different from the
bienium funding that we used to receive
two years ago.
So House Bill 8 also changed the way we
receive that particular appropriation
and any future appropriations in coming
years. So we just have to um uh be aware
of how the funding for appropriation
comes in. It comes in in three
installments now which is different from
the past. Used to come in in 10
installments. Uh so the the state has
changed not only the performance
measures but how they distribute the
funding to the colleges in Texas.
other state funding. The financial aid
for Swift transfer fast
is budgeted at $5.6 million.
So that has gone up $175,000
from the presentation on June the 25th.
The reason that that has gone up is
because now we have received the uh
allocation for the fall of 2024. We know
what that amount is. And then also we
num we know what the numbers that were
reported for the spring. So since Miss
Zuma had that information, she was up to
able to update her revenue projection
for the fast. Also um keep in mind that
the state increased the funding from
56.87
cents per per semester credit hour to
58.52
cents per semester credit hour.
As far as benefits are concerned, um for
the first time in several years, the
state has raised uh the premium rates
for health insurance. They raised them
by 8%.
And so um the state currently funds our
health insurance at about close to 50%.
They don't provise funding for physical
plant personnel. However, we have to
budget for that. and the grants uh pay
for their own health insurance benefits.
However, um due to the 8% increase uh
that is going to result in a must be
funded or critical item that you're
going to see on the additional funding
request of $74,000.
You're going to see in a little while.
The reason is the state increased our
rate by 8%. We incur close to $7.7
million of um health insurance costs
that we fund and so uh you can do the
extension on that. Uh there's no change
in the state contribution rate for TRS.
So, just as a reminder, last
presentation we talked about the change
in the purchasing uh mandatory bidding
requirement from $50 to $100,000
and uh the board discussed this
particular item and uh agreed that for
the next coming fiscal year, the board
would also like to see uh competitive
processes that are done for anything
valued at $100,000 or more. the college
is working to update its uh procedures
or purchasing procedures with regard to
this and you'll see that in the August
27th
board meeting. So now we look at the
projection for revenues for 2526.
So as I mentioned the current year is
the basis for projections going into the
future and largely that's what this
represents.
uh on the state appropriations line we
show an uh increase to
the appropriation compared to the
current year. Um that is a result of the
college performing better on its
performing on its performance measures
that were reported last year. Last year,
uh, the college received a $4.7 million
dynamic adjustment
over what the coordinated board had
predicted for us. That was a very
positive result for the year. This
appropriation increase largely reflects
that and also the increase in the fast
funding rate from 56 to $58 per semester
credit hours.
Um overhead recovery, we predict a small
decrease of $84,000
there. Um on the local funds, tuition
and fees, we have a small decrease
predicted there. We are continuing to
look at this item. This is item we
talked about. We're looking at the fall
enrollment and we will adjust
accordingly leading up to the final
budget presentation. Either up or down,
we're going to adjust it. The idea is to
produce a sustainable budget and that is
our key objective.
Um and so property tax property taxes
now that we have the certified
valuations and the no new revenue rate
we predict that we're going to receive
at least $75.2 million in property tax
revenue. Uh the property tax revenues we
budget very conservative conservatively
for those. Uh the big the big thing on
that is that the certified values that
the CAD provides the taxing entities are
discounted about 2.8%.
So when the college receives those
values, they're lower by 2.8%. Because
they are they are predicting what
refunds and lawsuits may result in. So
the the government agencies like that
because it results in a more
conservative budget just in case you
have a large refund or a large lawsuit
that may happen. So our property tax
revenue is based upon a certified rate
2.8% lower. However, when uh property
tax owners are mailed their statements,
those do not contain that discount.
So generally we receive more revenue
than what we budget because the CAD is
very good at resolving those protests.
Um and so the the CAD the the city
collects uh 100% of the valuation that
they mailed out. But we budget
conservatively and in doing so we're
still predicting 2.1 million higher
major other income. We continue to
budget interest income very
conservatively at $5 million.
Um as I said interest income is
something that's unpredictable and not
something that's sustainable. So we
don't build up our budget on that. We
feel $5 million is very achievable. Even
if the Fed cut rates uh by more than
half, we would still be able to support
our budget and the future does not
predict that kind of uh decline in
rates. So we feel confident about what
we budgeted for.
So we we see um overall the take the
takeaway here is this 173.9 million is
our total projected revenues
uh for next year. We cannot exceed that
as we develop a budget. So that's our uh
line in the sand. Uh it's an increase of
of 7.4 4 million over budgeted revenues
for 2425.
So how do those budgeted revenues what
do how do they look like in terms of
source of funding? Property taxes
continue to be the largest revenue
source at 43.27%
75.2 2 million followed by
appropriations almost 50 million tuition
and fees. Those are the three uh largest
revenue sources and then we have other
income self-supporting and overhead
recovery. So this is showing the
previous slide uh by percentage of
revenue source.
And so we get to the baseline budget.
This is a result of all the budget
submissions by the executive levels, all
the vice presidents and associate vice
presidents. So the budget office works
to compile all of these budgets, review
them, and so those budget submissions
also uh include additional requests that
we're going to talk about in a little
bit. But this is the baseline budget.
This is nothing above what they had the
year before.
So u the baseline budget shows a
decrease of uh $1 million that reflects
the movement of positions people leaving
the college at a high salary and then
the recruit the people recruited coming
in at a lower salary. So that largely is
the result of that. So you see a
decrease in the baseline budget from
2425 to 2526 which is the middle column
continue
>> of $1,59,000.
And so the other section in here is the
self-supporting area and they always
budget or break even. They cannot exceed
what they have budgeted for. So that is
budgeted at break even. No effect on the
baseline budget. So then this baseline
budget
reflected by functional area would be
distributed like this. Uh so Dr. Smith
is still in the lead here
million
uh 33.11% of the budget and then uh he's
followed by institutional support at
almost 50 million 30% academic support
which also belongs to Dr. center uh 20.3
million 12.28%
and operations and and maintenance
physical plant 13 million student
services 12.7
transfers 3.5
public service 3.8 self 23 and research
at 214,000.
So this is the way that the baseline
budget is allocated by functional area.
So you see the same baseline budget
distributed by expense category. So in
here uh the largest category is uh
faculty salaries at 34.13%.
And then you can see in the block here
how that details out between full-time
and part-time faculty. And then over
here staff salaries close to 50 million.
You see the detail between full-time and
part-time over here and overtime and
then followed by supplies and services
28 million 17% of the budget benefits 14
million transfer 7.5 contingency 6.5
travel 1.3 equipment 1.1
so this is how the expenses break out um
for the baseline budget
The interesting thing here, if you add
faculty salaries, staff salaries, and
benefits, you get close to 73% of the
budget.
I real quick some time ago there was a
question about having enough part-time
to split between part-time and full-time
faculty and I think is there any
question about do we have to look at
those kinds of t uh sachs evaluations
are we still okay there we we are to
date Mr. Xer so what Mr. person is
referencing is um gosh um 12 years ago
um we had a SAX on-site visit our
accrediting agency SAX COC now um
Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools Commission on Colleges did a
visit and they broke down our our
faculty ratios in a different manner
than they had ever done before. We're
one accreditation, one college, five
campuses, six sites total. And what they
did, and this is more in particular for
you, is they came in and they said they
looked at every single program on every
single campus and deemed that we had to
have full-time faculty at each of those
programs and um and campuses. Um that
caused the institution, we were put on
warning, uh we had to raise taxes and
hire 55 additional full-time faculty
over the course of the year. Um, prior
to that, they looked at us as a district
and we covered between 47 and 52%
full-time faculty in any one of those
given terms during that the the five
years preceding. When they came, we were
just under 48%. We turn around, we hired
those full-time faculty. Dr. Smith and
his team did a tremendous job of hiring
again 55 additional full-time faculty.
Uh, we were taken off morning the
following summer. uh and at one point I
I believe that we had um 72% of our
sections taught by full-time faculty
despite the ratio. So you see that the
full-time faculty salaries are just over
the part-time faculty but our full-time
faculty teaches the bulk of the courses
at the institution. I don't recall where
we are currently.
The last time I saw was 72%. I'm not
sure where we are now.
>> Yeah, I think we're down around uh 68%.
Uh currently uh every position that
becomes available or is requested for
faculty uh gets discussed at leadership
um our instructional deans and EPS uh
talked about every single position. We
look at the ratios that uh are being
referred to across the district before
we make a determination on the point. We
don't have any we're not concerned about
>> that's a great great question structure
bringing me back to the actual question.
We just had an accrediting site visit.
Um we were in 23. Uh this was not
anything that came up with um uh with
the site visit or the offsite visit. We
were found in compliance with the ratio
fulltime. So you don't you don't worry
about it. The next time is in 2028 um
where it'll come up and they'll look at
that closely and we want to make sure
that we're always in a good position.
So this is a look at what the additional
funding requests for 2526
are under the critical needs. Uh overall
there's a request for $1.7
million. What changed from the June 25th
presentation is we had initially
submitted a request for 264,000
in increase in insurance premiums. Well,
now the insurance carriers have provided
uh what they're going to what they're
going to ask for for insurance. So, we
lowered that to what the increase is for
insurance rates. So, that has been
lowered. And then as I mentioned earlier
the increase of 8% to the health
insurance uh originally we had estimated
450,000 we were off on that we were too
low. Uh we uh updated our numbers our
projections for health insurance cost.
8% of that cost has resulted in $74,000
that we need for health insurance.
The other must be funded items have not
changed from the last presentation.
Under the other funding requests from
executive levels, uh that is decreased
from uh $2.4 million
down to 1.956,
a decrease of about $400,000, a little
over 400,000. Uh the main decrease came
in the instruction and workforce
education area. Um, so that's the main
decrease there.
So this slide is a compilation of the
big numbers that we saw for
total projected revenues. The first row
shows the number that we covered under
total projected revenues, $173.9
million. So, we cannot exceed that.
That's going to be our uh top of the top
of the budget line. And the baseline
preliminary budget is $165.4
million. I'm looking in the no salary
increase column.
Just to start a review of this
particular slide, uh it results in a
budget surplus of 8 point around $ 8.5
million.
So, how is that allocated? Well, we have
must be funded the increases that are
mandatory that we have to cover of $1.7
million. And then recall at the June
25th budget presentation workshop, uh we
talked about the 6% adjustment to the
salary tables where anybody making less
than $10 an hour would be brought up to
$10. That was about $200,000 of this
particular line item request. And the
difference was a 6% increase to the
entry levels on the tables which will
allow for recruitment and retaining
staff. So, uh that's what that $672,000
is all about. In the no salary increase
column, it results in surplus before
additional request of $6.1 million.
And so, uh we looked at the additional
request of 1.9 million. So if there was
no salary increase, there would be a
surplus of $4.1 million.
So the way this slide is laid out, a 1%
salary increase has a value of 1,29,000.
This includes uh for the related
benefits
for a salary increase as well.
So in the 1% column, you then see when
you plug that number in, it results in a
increase in bannual reserve of $3.1
million.
So as you move across the columns here
and look at the 3% column, you see that
the value of a 3% salary increase is a
little over $3 million and results in an
increase to the bianium reserve of $1
million.
If you continue across a 5% would result
in a uh need to go into banning reserve
a negative amount of almost a million
dollars.
>> What does the Fed uh expect inflation to
be this year?
>> The inflation rate right now is I think
about 2.4 Dr. somewhere.
>> Yeah, it rose to 2.7. um 2.7 but um I
think the current ratio shows it
trending down once again. Um
>> it's a great question, Judge. You and
economists will continue to try and
figure that out. They do anticipate that
inflation will will start to get closer
to 2% um at the end of this year going
into next year.
>> Yes, sir.
Looking at this the bottom line
additional requests going to the
previous page it said additional funding
requests for 2025 it says critical needs
must be funded 1.7 million and when you
said other funding requests and I I
don't see as must be requested but the
total of all that is uh 44,000 less
under 2 million but we take all of that
do I take that to mean that even though
it's not must be funded, we're going to
say we're going to fund all of those
requests at the requested amount. So, in
other words, that 1.956 million is is is
to accept it. It's my recommendation to
the board. Yes. Okay. That's all that's
why would it be preliminary? You mean
just because whole budget's preliminary?
Yes. Okay.
So are there any other questions
relating related to the funding strategy
options?
So what are the next steps? The next
steps are there's an item today to
approve a salary enhancement by the
board of trustees.
After that, at the August 27th board
meeting, acceptance of a certified
appraisal revolve, adoption of the 2526
budget, which will continue to be
evaluated,
adoption of the 2025 tax rate, August
27th as well. And then on September the
2nd, Laura and her team will roll the
budget into Banner
and our fiscal year begins September
1st, 2025.
So this is a large team effort.
Everybody has a piece of the pie here.
Special thanks to Miss Deas in her
office, Livana Venica and uh AP Zuma for
her revenue estimates and in my office.
Uh shout out to Juanita Martinez and
Lucia and Serio who have worked tires
tirelessly on this presentation.
uh they've been awesome and uh Mishani
is still a force. She provides guidance
and oversight on pieces of this um all
the way from France and so Dr. Sarata
and his uh initial meetings in May
evaluating additional requests and
guidance on different aspects of this as
well as my colleagues who have uh are
not shy about voicing their input. Uh
thank you to all of them and so
especially to the board of trustees for
receiving this presentation and any
questions you may have had with that.
Thank you. Thank you. Any questions?
Have any questions?
Okay. Thank you, sir. You're welcome as
always. Great job. Thank you.
5.3
>> Item 5.3 discussion and action to
approve salary increases for employees
of the El Paso County Community College
District for fiscal year 2025 2026
recommendation
>> judge working with um the cabinet
members as well as Mr. Floor's team and
budget. Uh my recommendation to the
board uh to entertain um for your
consideration to look at a salary
enhancement of 3%. Um that provides
again um a cost of living adjustment as
well as um dealing with inflation and at
the same time not having a budget so
tight that we're only seeing um a
$48,000 bianual reserve. Uh this would
allow us to a 3% enhancement would allow
us to still maintain approximately a
million dollar biium reserve. I'd remind
the board that uh based on an outcomes
um model, the the state appropriations
will change annually. We've been
fortunate based on the good work of um
everyone at the college led by my
colleagues on my left um that we've been
able to see state appropriations go up
since we implemented this new funding
model in 2023 and we've gone up
annually. There will come a time where
we will see an adjustment downward based
on um things that the state is putting
in place. I remind the board they're not
funding all associate degrees any
longer. It went from 10 years to 5 years
in one bienium. Uh we we are losing um
funding for six associates degrees. It
doesn't mean we're going to stop
providing those to students. We're going
to try to get them through faster and
get them to transfer as quickly as
possible. Uh but it's my recommendation
that the board entertain a 3% salary
enhancement for the institution.
Okay. Have a motion move to approve 3%.
>> Second.
>> Any discussion?
Call a question though.
>> Mr.
>> Hi.
>> Miss Nahara.
>> Mrs. Robless.
>> Hi.
>> Mrs. Moy.
>> Mr. Mendes.
>> Hi.
>> Mr. Mr. Hagerty.
>> Now I have a question. You said we're
not funding six six of the
What are the titles? Biology,
psychology.
>> Okay.
>> Big ones.
>> Let me thank the board on behalf of all
the faculty and staff, both full-time
and part-time, for your generosity with
the team. We certainly appreciate it. Um
we do our best to be good stewards of uh
the budget. Uh very proud of the work
that you've done with the budget and
what we've been able to do at the
institution. Thank you very much for
your uh entertaining and passing of the
3% salary announcement.
>> Okay.
We don't have to go into executive. So
can we just
>> for executive?
>> Yep. All right. So we're journed.
Yay!